after Chernobyl and after Fukushima
nukes just left a bad taste in people's
mouths if you're worried about safety
the metric that matters is deaths per
terat hour generated that's a statistic
you guys have absolutely can I just say
I'd be very concerned about that
statistic the Death part that's just
weird to count deaths by how much
electricity has been produced nuclear
energy you'll only die once in a while
[Music]
this is Star Talk special edition Neil
de grass Tyson your personal
astrophysicist and of a special edition
you know what that means we've got Gary
O'Reilly hi Neil hey former Soccer Pro
yes soccer announcer and we're borrowing
you from your soccer people yes okay and
at special edition we think all about
the human condition and all that matters
to make that work
and since you have been an injured
soccer player in your life you know
about The Human Condition I do and the
suffering there in although I'm not
going to place it above or Beyond anyone
else's suffering but uh we get a chance
on on special edition just to gaze into
some interesting topics yes yes and I
love it and I've got with us Paul mrio
nice to see you guys he's back yeah yes
always fine all right you you were a
former stock broker or or tney mergers
and Acquisitions which is hilar
hilarious and and you you became a
comedian after you mergers and
Acquisitions well I'm like how can I
give my mother an instant heart attack I
know oh when I did say it she said to me
I'm going to I said I'm going to leave
Wall Street to be a comedian she went
she looked me right in the eye she said
that better be your first joke oh good
one clever mom I like that and then uh
yes and then made a right turn and got
into comedy so Emmy and Peabody Award
winning I mean that at Peabody that's
that's coveted right there high it's
that little I didn't know youon here
from the cartoon character and you also
work The Late Show with Steven Co work
on The Late Show with Stephen we go back
to the Daily Show together Sten he's the
first name St oh sorry St Co unlike
me he's that guy on the TV I know who
you are but I don't know your name yeah
so Paul you're so high futin like do you
still even do stand up like regular
comedians I'm so high fluent you're not
supposed to look me in the eye when
you're talking me that's high fluent
I heard rumor you have a Broadway show
State show yeah called permission to
speak and uh it involves we're all
disconnected and divisive but if we get
together and share stories realize we
have more in common than we think so
it's me involving yeah it it's born out
of my standup and liking to talk to
audience members and it's grown into the
show and the great Frank Oz is directing
it which still blows my mind we love me
some Frank Oz yeah I know he's been a
guest on our show I know he's constantly
backwards talking though with that Yoda
thing it's extremely annoying no it's
been really cool we take it around the
country and folks can go to my website
to check it out where we're going to be
Paul mural.com but it's been really cool
in a sort of a breakout from my standup
Okay cool so Gary you and your producer
put together this topic we did and I
love me it it's nukes M I love me some
nukes not the missile kind nuke nukes
predate missiles okay just so you know
when I say nuke I mean the nucleous of
the atom and the energy contained
therein now what you do with what you
with it after that's your problem that
is okay so set up this show what do you
have ai data centers well we know what
they are what we don't quite know yet is
how we are going to supply their rapidly
increasing energy demands with reliable
and clean energy so where do we look
fossil fuels are being phased out well
maybe sustainables do not suit everyone
and who needs a giant nuclear power
plant in their backyard so what are our
options climate change means our energy
must be clean reli
economically viable and socially
acceptable the way I see it this
requires some clarity some science and
an expert with both so Neil would you
like to introduce our guests I would be
delighted good I love my physics peeps
when they're out there and we have one
we have one join me in welcoming
Katherine Huff Katherine welcome to Star
talk it's great to meet you great to be
here thanks for having me I gotta do it
in the voice welcome to Star
Talk excellent that's for the first time
you got to get one of those those uh you
are associate professor in the
department no this is this is a mouth
this is like a business card's worth it
in the department of nuclear plasma and
radiological
engineering that's right which means She
Glows at night at University Illinois uh
at champagne orbana hang on flip the
card now it goes to the back of the card
oh it keeps going yes so your PhD is in
nuclear engineering but not only that
you've actually had a tour of Duty
serving
the federal government you assistant
secretary for nuclear energy in the
department of energy uh
2022 to 20 24 so you did a little Tour
of Duty there so you you've seen it all
so Katherine could you just remind
everybody the difference between fusion
and fision yeah so in fision which is
conventional nuclear power here in the
United States and around the world you
separate you break apart uh heavy atom
like uranium 235 or plutonium 239
whereas Fusion gains energy from The
Binding reaction between two light
particles fusing and these would be
isotopes of helium or hydrogen typically
and so you're talking about completely
different ends of the periodic table the
forces that hold a nucleus together The
Binding energy of that nucleus you can
achieve a net increase a net sort of
output in energy by coming down the
isotop to a curve by splitting a big
atom or by coming up it uh by fusing two
light atoms and that's because of the
shape of The Binding energy curve for
the nucleus so and we know in
astrophysics the peak of that curve or
depending if you plot the other way the
base of that curve is iron and stars
give up the ghost when they hit iron
because you can't Fizz it or fuse it and
get energy out of it it sucks energy and
star is in the business of making energy
it hits iron
that's all she wrote it collapses and
then explodes in a rebound as a
supernova so we know all about this in
astrophysics there's quite the
relationship between what nuclear
physicists do and what we do thinking
about stars in the universe so let's
let's try let me just open this up
because after Chernobyl and after Three
Mile Island and after
Fukushima you know nukes just left a bad
taste in people's mouths they all it was
always that way and these then just
became evidence for it and so there's a
lot of
re branding that's going to have to
happen going forward if
nuclear energy is going to rejoin the
conversation so what are your
challenges squaring that Circle from the
sources of energy people typically talk
about especially in the green movement
and nuclear energy
as it kind of wnab be as part of that
conversation yeah absolutely I think a
lot of it's around numerics right
talking to people about the metrics that
matter if you're worried about safety
the metric that matters is deaths per
terawatt hour generated you have that
that's a statistic you guys have can I
just say I would be can I just say I'd
be very concerned about that statistic
the death the Death part yes that's just
weird to count deaths by how much
electricity has been produced energy
you'll only die once in a
while no but but does that exist for
coal yeah it's only interesting as a
metric if you're using it to compare
energy sources and so a number of
different data sets have informed a
number of deaths per terawatt hour from
solar wind coal Etc and nuclear is way
way way down at the bottom near you know
slightly below solar and wind actually
even if you include Fukushima and
Chernobyl interestingly no deaths at
three Island and you have you know
geothermal I think is one of the only
ones that is lower the nuclear in terms
of deaths per terawatt hour and it's
construction projects there's serious
issues maintaining wind turbines like
putting things on roofs and installing
that sort of thing doesn't happen on a
nuclear construction site because the
incredible amount of Regulation and so
you really are left with like accidents
and so there's plenty of life cycle
analyses of deaths but also you know
Carbon for per terot hour and the
reality is nuclear in terms of
generation is higher and so the
denominator is huge wait higher as a as
a return it's it's high there's more
power generated per per whatever per
anything so the ter aatt hours are
higher yes by a long shot yes oh so
that's how it wins I get course she
pulled some fast denominator numerator
math there did you stay with that pulled
the right turn on
you no no because if you're if you have
Geral on a treadmill producing your
energy and it kills a thousand Geral
they didn't make much energy to begin
with right so the death rate relative to
the energy return that ratio is is bad
for you again correct me if I'm wrong
Catherine nukes are so potent in their
capacity to produce energy that whoever
died doing whatever there's so much
energy produced out the other and it
compensates for that it's it's it's a
relative number it's a relative correct
doesn't it beg for more regulation and
sort of Renewables like you're right
about solar like you know some guy that
was working at Jiffy Lube is now selling
your solar panels and putting it up half
drunk like isn't it is sounds like a bad
experience on your behalf yeah we call
him my uncle that way too precise in
examples my uncle Archie just any
anything in any but doesn't it sort of
beg for that on some level sort of of if
there's that level of sort of death rate
relative to Renewables so interestingly
Renewables like wind and solar and
geothermal and nuclear they're all in
the same category which is just
magnitudes and magnitudes lower than
fossils and you know nuclear ends up
winning because historically nuclear has
been the largest source of carbon free
emissions free Power right and it's
those emissions from the fossils and you
know that that really takes them to a
completely different order of magnitude
in terms of death per terawatt hour and
so I would say that Renewables are safe
nuclear is safe geothermal is safe it's
really the fossils you need to be
worried about when you're talking about
safety because they impact human health
in a really demonstrable clear way uh
how many people ever have died mining
coal it's a great question right the who
has estimated all kinds of things for
full total cost and death of the fossil
industry and separates it into
particulate related premature deaths and
whatnot I don't know the exact number
for people dying in Coal but it's not
zero okay it's pretty high by the way
when a physicist says not zero it
doesn't mean it's one or
two it's pretty high right like you
would lose people in collapses okay
we've got clean high energy production
in totality with fusion and fishing but
we still have some radioactive material
that is going to make people unhappy
more than zero not my backyard don't put
it there they you and the nimes there
they are I mean that's why they're all
spelled in capitals because they want
you to know that's what it's about so it
doesn't sound so clean but can't you
point to the fact that nuclear power has
been around for years and people have
accepted the fact that there's
radioactive ways sort of hanging out
anyway like it's not a completely new
concept well they're not accepting that
it's there they're accepting the
disposal plans that that Katherine just
told us about and Paul's right that you
know it hasn't been a huge impact on
humans day-to-day lives because it's an
incredibly small volume of spent fuel
from fision reactors we have 60 years of
spent nuclear fuel you know it has been
producing close to 20% of our electric
power in the United States and it's
produced enough material to if you sort
of ignore the packaging and focus on the
uranium fill a football field not very
tall you know few meters high and what
people seem to ignore is if you put it
in the right bag on Sunday nights when
you put your garbage out it's
radioactive material they'll pick it up
yeah yeah that's right it's going to be
put it in the blue bag and put it on
Staten Island remind me not to live in
your neighborhood ever exactly there's
the glowing Paul house yeah so the thing
is this stuff gets buried so far deep
into wa wait but but you're you're mix
in the middle of nowhere you're mixing
two things and I think they're separable
variables you're saying nukes are dirty
because fision is dirty but Fusion isn't
so dirty I understand that that's true
it just doesn't happen yet so Catherine
are you in your world world of thinking
about this combining them together as a
solution going forward or you totally
leaning Fusion excited by the recent
sort of ignition test that went on at at
at the Livermore Labs I'm a fion girl
I'm a sort of classic nuclear energy
Fusion person I have great optimism for
Fusion but it will take quite a long
time and interestingly you probably know
this that nif test is an inertial
confinement Fusion experiment a lot of
the commercial proposals that are attemp
ing to commercialize Fusion in the near
term are more like the eer device in
France that is a magnetic confinement
Fusion it's a slightly different
approach and seeing real breakthroughs
in the eater device may be quite a few
years from now so you know we await some
breakthroughs in things like the first
wall protection things like that but for
me I'm here about kind of conventional
nuclear energy and Advanced Vision
energy that's sort of on the horizon
right now so we are correct to fold that
into the conversation and I'm still
waiting for Mr Fusion the home Fusion
from Back to the Future yeah so the
thing is we it seems like we don't quite
have a handle on Fusion to make it right
operate the way we really want to not
yet but is this an EXT is an extension
of this plasma Fusion which has a which
has a break even issue right more heat
goes in to get the heat out and that's
an extension of traditional Fusion
process right so there are no operating
Fusion reactors
there like could be someday maybe if you
guys tried harder there would
be yeah I'm not a fusion scientist I
like work in a
nuclear there we go went that way by the
way when you were at the department of
energy when you left your office at
night would you turn the thermostat down
I'm just curious absolutely okay good
absolutely every light switch has a
little don't forget to turn me off like
sticker MH okay so what are going to be
the major consumers of our energy going
forward AI data centers for sure then we
look at maybe Quantum Computing we've
got bit mining throw in the development
of electric vehicles I mean we may have
already calculated because I've joined
the doe obviously we have may have
calculated already but have we
calculated enough the terms of how
exponentially this consumption is going
to go yeah it's totally data centers and
things like that but it's also increased
electrification like for EVS but all
kinds of other things as well and an
increased sort of Revival of industrial
manufacturing that requires not just
electricity but heat we see carbon- free
steel companies wanting to start up in
the United States and they don't have
enough heat where do you get Heat
usually you burn fossil fuels very few
clean energy sources are available to
provide that direct heat nuclear is
there for it so yeah we have a huge
amount of demand are we even factoring
it in you know the projections for how
much new gwatt worth you know many tens
of gigawatts worth of capacity are going
to be needed to support Data Center
centers in the coming decades to support
these kinds of Endeavors they grow and
grow every time you look at the news and
so we are in a position where the
existing clean energy infrastructure has
to expand to support those data centers
especially data centers that need 247
reliable always on power if you own a
multi-billion dollar data center you
don't want it to be running at 2%
capacity because the wind stop blowing
you need 100% power 247 regardless of we
and the issue there is in sort of these
data centers which are going to are and
will continue to be everywhere and the
scaling of traditional power plants
nuclear power plants you have to get to
SMR smrs right which are not fully
developed yet Paul could you tell the
rest of us what SMR means uh small
modular reactors did he get it right
Catherine yeah he did you know how
exhausting it is that I have to carry
this guy all the time but in that sense
the proximity is an issue right because
if your data centers are too far away
from The Source the nuclear source of
energy you're going to have loss of data
loss of energy and so it becomes sort of
being able to build a lot of these smrs
which are smaller and can be closer to
the data centers yeah you're absolutely
right transmission especially building
new high voltage power lines to move
gigawatts of power from a generator to a
consumer is expensive it you know cuts
through land that usually needs permits
sometimes it can be very slow so
collocated data centers with smaller
more modular reactor builds has an
advantage the more modularity in these
builds is certainly also supposed to
contribute to the speed and reliability
with which we can deploy them the idea
being that it takes a really long time
to build a gigawatt scale nuclear power
plant but if you build a
30% you know sized 300 megawatt reactor
then maybe you can build a few more of
them get some lessons learned they maybe
move a little faster you might be paying
slightly more per kilowatt hour but you
should be able to deploy them quicker
and learn faster there by coming down
the cost curve of those construction
learnings that's a whole future there
that has not yet been realized we've
probably had the last major nuclear
power plant built 30 something years ago
in the United States yes in the United
States or around developed Nations now
you're saying what are the new
technologies small modular
reactors smrs to
Advanced reactors so you you've got
these micro reactors you've had all
these different sort of acronyms going
on where are we right now with the
Technologies and what are our options
for fishing and for Fusion going forward
as you know what you've got to have them
close the nimes are going to dance up
and down and scream like merry hell we
know that so how are we going to sort
this out and with what technology yeah I
think we have Technologies at all sizes
in the advanced reactor space the most
recent two builds in the United states
where the Vogal unit 3 and four those
are AP 1000s from Westinghouse they're
big like conventional nuclear reactors
but they incorporate some passive safety
and so they're kind of a generation
three plus design at the sort of big
gigawatt scale they were built pretty
over schedule and over budget and so
there's a lot of trend towards shrinking
that kind of design a light waterer
reactor that's just smaller you've got
designs from htech and GE Hitachi
Westinghouse has a shrunken version of
the ap1000 the three ap300 yeah you've
got new scale is one of those small
modular light waterer reactor designs
but then in addition to that you can
also build small modular Advanced
reactor designs and there are a number
of companies pursuing commercialization
of that with two deployments already
happening with the support of the
Department of energy these would involve
more advanced coolants and fuels like
sodium which is a liquid metal is that
the M salt yeah msrs yeah what does
sodium do for you so sodium has a couple
cool features
as a coolant it's highly conductive and
so it's extremely performant to move the
heat from the fuel to where you needed
in the turbine through an exchange
process eventually but that conduction
is really useful but it's also very
helpful for the neutronics control of
that criticality that I talked about
earlier so it absorbs neutrons yeah so
it keeps the neutrons fast by not
moderating them if you combine that with
a metal fuel sodium cooled fast reactors
have an opportunity to be quite
passively safe using reactor physics and
negative feedbacks from the expansion of
the fuel and the expansion of the
coolant and a sort of neutronic behavior
of the coolant to drive power down if
power goes High keeping things balanced
regulated isn't there a practicality
issue though because corrosion is a
problem with that process right so
critically sodium in this case is a
liquid metal when it's combined with
something else it becomes a salt there
are salt reactors we can talk about that
but yeah sodium itself is also somewhat
cor corrosive you can't see through it
because it's liquid metal and it is
pyrophoric so when it gets wet it tends
to burst into flames good yeah that's
good to know just so it gets wet just
just just spend a quick second reminding
us I don't want to simplify it too much
but correct me if I've done so in the
end all you're trying to create is a
source of heat to raise the temperature
of water that will spin a
turbine that has magnetic fields and
coils in it to generate electricity
that's the same way we've been making
electricity since Faraday that's half of
it old school is that correct half is
old school yeah is that correct yes it
is almost exactly like a coal plant
you're just boiling the water in a
different way in a different way
different source of heat I mean is the
goal to get even higher temperatures I
mean are we aiming for building a star
on Earth here what are we doing so star
on Earth would be pretty hard with
fision we await our Fusion colleagues
for that matter but the fision reactors
that are being deployed with some of
these Advanced coolants will get much
much hotter safely than conventional
reactors we're talking 800 degrees
Celsius really high temperatures which
is quite a bit more than the 300 degrees
SE we would usually see from
conventional light water reactors so the
higher temperature the water I mean it's
under pressure I guess right yeah
absolutely and if you're going to use
that heat directly then it's very useful
for industrial applications like you
know reducing steel reducing iron for
the steel making process rather than
making electricity out of it through a
turbine right and rather than burning
natural gas or coal to make direct heat
the first application of the X energy
high temperature gas reactor will be at
a Dow Chemical plant well where they'll
use both the direct heat and the
electricity that they convert some of
that heat straight from the reactor
won't be converted at all into
electricity well with temperatures that
high can't you generate electricity that
is more robust for lack of a better term
and that can travel farther distances
without loss not exactly the way we
convert heat into electricity but it
isly the
case it is the case that high
temperature heat is higher quality
because it is easier to convert you have
a little bit less loss yeah very good
very important Point okay what I hear
now Neil is this is the is the next
iteration of the smartphone right so
you've got these big clunky cell phones
that we used to have back in the ' 80s
the shoulder mounted one that they used
in in the one that Magnum PI would have
or or or or gecko in right right so now
shoulder mounted s i remember okay 1987
I I was saw the movie in real time and
I'm looking at I said Gee I wish I was
rich I a phone like that I want a just a
phone in a suitcase so now they're
getting smaller and smaller but we're
getting higher temperatures out of them
it sounds a lot like the smartphone
and how much they cost and who's paying
for it well just I think you confused
two things there what's also happening
is chips are getting more efficient
right so your laptop used to burn the
top of your thighs it doesn't do that
anymore what were you putting it exactly
exactly and why was it on your thighs so
so Katherine if we have Quantum
Computing which does much more Computing
in less time ultimately that's less
consumption of energy isn't it or not
yeah one would hope right and then you
can use that energy for other things
that will advance human Prosperity right
uh we can also use it to displace the
kinds of fossil energy that we still
rely on and contributes to The Climate
crisis so these small modular reactors
as I said mrr thank you for reminding
me how much do they actually cost and
who is writing that particular check it
remains to be seen precisely how much
much each design will cost but we're
looking at a scenario I would I would
refer you to the liftoff report that de
we put out but it estimates that new
nuclear power you know is going to be in
the order between
$120 per megawatt hour for the first of
a Kind all the way down to nth of a Kind
maybe in the $60 per meat hour range
that's a big range but it's very similar
to the kinds of ranges we're seeing when
we look at you know Renewables plus grid
scale storage which is the only
comparable reliable 24/7 clean energy
when that involves Renewables right
Alternatives would be new natural gas
with carbon capture cheaper certainly
maybe between a 100 at the high end and
$60 per megawatt hour at the low end
geothermal has a very very big range but
very similar to nuclear you know 130 at
the high end 57 at the low end Hydro
power is always cheap I was recently in
Iceland the nearly 100% geothermal I
mean they're sitting on top of multiple
volcanic is it the issue here partly
like there's two streams of Technology
battling each other in other words
demand for energy right like in the year
2060 there's going to be
12,230 streaming services alone right
okay you're going to have house plants
that self waterer self- fertilize and
can talk to you right and my can we in
all seriousness can you keep up with
that with you know these lazy Fusion
people that clearly aren't pushing the
envelope and just you know a phoning an
in no in all seriousness so can you can
we develop energies fast enough to keep
up with these incredible demands that
are and we have we have become more
efficient like I would say the total
wattage of all light bulbs in my house
is probably 100 Watts that's I got 50
light bulbs and they're all LEDs okay
all right so Katherine I don't even have
shut off lights before you leave the
room cuz I don't need it but but the
advances I mean there's there are guilt
inducing mirrors that are going to come
out soon where you just stand in front
of it and say really that's what you
want to eat like like so I seem to hit a
nerve with you on that one so can or are
you talking about your own life what
which one is it exactly but so can in
all in all seriousness can can the
technology that's needed is it there to
keep up with the demands and the new
demands that we haven't even foreseen
yet it's a great question doe has
estimated that if we want to hit Net
Zero by 2050 Net Zero what Net Zero
carbon carbon thank you okay yeah we
will have to build at least 550 to 770
new gws of firm clean power some of that
will be Hydro or you know geothermal and
things like that battery storage but at
least about 200 gaw of that will need to
be nuclear and we're not the only ones
that made that calculation across the
world dozens of countries has have
committed to tripling nuclear energy in
their countries but just since we have
flat earthers Among Us don't say across
the world say around the world okay just
re just re give me that sentence again I
had to get that in I had to get that
absolutely yeah around the world dozens
of countries have committed tripling
nuclear power all right so we we have a
football field a few meters high worth
of spent nuclear fuel right correct yes
how are these are are these new Advanced
modular small modular reactors our good
friends the
SMR are any of them going to be able to
recycle that spent fuel some of them
could you know I mentioned sodium cooled
fast reactors earlier which have metal
Fuel and while Terra power isn't
currently planning to recycle in the
United States it is an amable technology
for the kinds of recycling that other
nations do France for example recycles a
great deal of their spent nuclear fuel
resulting in lower volumes lower masses
and much shorter lifetimes of long-term
radioactivity
by putting the longest lived and most
useful Isotopes back in the reactor uh
we could do that but in the United
States we don't currently have the
infrastructure to do that so it would
take a real government effort to move
forward on recycling but you know when I
was a de this was definitely something
that we were continuing to do research
on and there was a great deal of
interest from the commercial side in
seeing recycling be back on a table in
terms of options molten salt reactors
also were mentioned earlier I should
note in the SMR MSR Universe molt and
salt reactors are also very amable to
recycling I like the ASMR universe and
yeah yes
how how how's your nuclear power doing
yes tell me about it yes so are we still
mining uranium there's still plenty of
uranium left in Earth's crust for this
yeah we are still mining uranium um some
of the best uranium in the world comes
from mines in Canada but it exists in a
lot of places including the United
States Australia Kazakhstan how about
braing oh gosh too soon so yeah I think
the reality is unless you do a great
deal of recycling you're going to
continue to mine uranium so yeah
recycling would reduce our need for new
fresh uranium but isn't that part of the
issue is the geopolitical concerns of
this right the more we come up with this
great technology andmr that feed these
data centers there's a lot of uranium
out there but they're not in every
country and some of these countries are
borderline sort of friendly terrorists
take over like so how do you factor that
in and should some other simultaneous
technology be developed away from
Nuclear So energy so that we're not so
dependent on on uranium and the
potential you have a hotline to the
state department you know it basically
comes down to not going back to relying
on one single exactly yeah I think
that's what it comes down to right
that's right if if there's a trouble in
one sector you just shift the economics
you'll be but if you have single point
failure everything is running on oil
into fossil fuel there's a problem the
biggest bottle neck for that uranium
fuel cycle is that you know the mining
of uranium there's lots of sources of it
but then the processing conversion and
then enrichment of that fuel where you
increase the number of isotopes of
uranium 235 per kilogram of total
uranium that enrichment process and the
fuel fabrication process all happen at a
at much smaller number of facil
internationally and so yeah you know
quite quite to your point International
collaboration has been necessary to
ensure that you know if Russia who
dominated historically conversion and
enrichment capabilities in the last 20
years or so if they decided not to sell
to the United States we needed to have
more capabilities in the US and among
our allies France the UK Etc and so that
has been underway in fact right behind
me is the law where reband Russia and
uranium from uh Russia you know Imports
in the near term so that we could
protect some of our ability to invest in
new enrichment capability Katherine if
you have what's called spent uranium MH
and that is basically waste product from
fision uranium fision what does it mean
to recycle it you have to boost the
isotope back or stick it in a in a
particle accelerator again what because
you have the uranium how would you
accomplish this so there's two different
ways but basically the sped fuel that
you start with is a mixture of uranium
atoms and split fision products so the
two parts that the uranium atom splits
into this might be iodine and teesi
practically you know half of the
Isotopes in periodic table uh or in the
chart of the nucleid the mixture needs
to be separated so that those fision
products are removed from the total the
already split atoms so I think the
public is generally not familiar with
the chart of the nucleotides uh we all
know the periodic table of elements
because that's that mysterious chart of
boxes that sat in the front of your
chemistry class and the the table of
nucleotides those were always in the
more advanced chemistry classes the one
I didn't go to or the physics classes
and so that lists not just the elements
but all the
Isotopes possible for each of the
elements that's a more complicated
diagram correct it is it's quite a bit
more complicated and it's extremely
useful for nuclear Engineers because we
end up producing a lot of those Isotopes
inside reactors during the fision
process okay so you can track their
whereabouts but can you make little
cocktails to to find which ones work
better with each other to be able to
take that forward that's an interesting
idea you know um some of them fall into
chemistry groups that can be useful for
industrial applications and things like
that so one of the interesting
possibilities for recycling which I'll
get to how you do it in a second but one
of the interesting possibilities for
recycling is that some of those products
that aren't useful in the reactor and
are otherwise waste some of those
products are hard to generate otherwise
but can be useful for
you know medical reasons Imaging other
kinds of radioactive you listed technum
as one of the byproducts and I've seen
that used in medical uh Imaging so
that's what you mean by possibly
recycling some of this material
absolutely technum 99 meta stable is
routinely used for things like thyroid
Imaging and whatnot right right cool so
it's picking through your dumpsters
exactly that's right a very specialized
high Precision uh Radioactive dumpster
yeah but how do you can't boost the
uranium back into the isotope it needs
to be and then just run it no but
generally speaking what you end up doing
is you take out those fision products
and you still have a great deal of
enriched material left and during the
fision process you have been breeding a
little bit of plutonium some of the
uranium 238 atoms have absorbed a
neutron and then another Neutron and
they move their way up the chart of the
nucleates into plutonium 239 which is
also file so you can put both the
uranium and plutonium back into the
reactor usefully along with some of the
other transuranic elements and that's
recycling you can do it with aquous
chemistry or electrochemistry and that's
no different from recycling Plastics or
it's they got to carry their weight with
their waste products that's right that's
right it'll be a time when I could take
my L nuclear waste to the dump on a
Sunday on your have to make a dump run
no but then you sort it out in the you
sort it out or I have a you got the
right little bins for the right sort of
waste I have a guy who sorts my
radiation why has you got a guy yeah I
pay him 50 bucks and
he's easy to find he's glowing can you
explain to me why this is going to sound
like a Nei question but like why we
haven't gotten better at reducing the
amount of radioactive waste that gets
generated in these processes and is
there an attempt or again are all you
scientists just
lazy so first of all the volume is
pretty small to start with but yeah
there's been a lot of work in fuel
utilization so that the amount of fuel
that you put in is used to the maximum
extent practical a lot of that has
resulted in designs that will leverage a
higher initial enrichment of uranium
you'll see this in a lot of small
modular reactor designs because it
allows the reactor to be smaller and in
a lot of cases it'll allow for a higher
fuel efficiency or fuel utilization what
kind of radioactive Wass you get out of
fast
reactors it's a metal uranium plutonium
fision product object right it and it's
never sort of when it's sort of comes
out of a reactor it's going to be in the
same format is you know you get a lot of
Simpsons kind of images where it looks
like a glowing green go goo spent
nuclear fuel is actually a uranium oxide
coming out of conventional reactors so
it's a type of ceramic it's quite heavy
and it's in little pellets but it's a
solid uh and quite dull in the case of a
sodium cooled fast reactor it would be a
solid metal cylinder in the case of a
molten salt reactor where the uranium is
dissolved into a liquid salt in the
reactor these don't really exist
commercially yet but they've been
proposed that would be a liquid but that
would be the only kind of reactor that
has sort of a liquid waste so is spent
fuel then sort of turned into a ceramic
and then very deep underground so it's
CU that's kind of the way it originates
in Earth to begin with before we extract
it do we then kind of send it back in a
similar State yeah so it's a rock or
when it comes out and then when you put
it back in it's a solid uh uranium oxide
typically and it's contained in a
canister that's Steel and then concrete
and layers upon layers of shielding but
Katherine you they're not equally as
safe yeah so it's fairly straightforward
to um maintain a fision reaction at a
stable steady state at this point with
our development of Technology but there
are feedbacks that could drive that
reaction into Super criticality um and
you have to spend a lot of time
balancing the reaction in the reactor
whereas a fusion reaction its tendency
is to end this is why it's so hard to
make a fusion reactor it's a very hard
reaction to maintain because it's hard
to maintain and because there's not this
sort of opportunity for easy super
criticality then you don't end up in
this situation where you might become
overpowered create a lot of extra heat
you weren't ready for melt things down
Etc so fundamentally since the stable
state of a fusion reaction is to not be
happening it's a little bit easier to
keep them safe and you don't have uh
Radioactive
byproducts so in Fusion there are
activated byproducts but not the kind of
high level fision products that are very
radioactive for a very long time that
we'll have to manage as a spent nuclear
Fuel and fision gotcha and you have to
dispose of it in some careful way that's
right and multiple nations are making
real progress on that fin Finland is
just about to start operating their
final repository Canada has just
selected a site for their final
repository Sweden has gotten permission
to begin constructing their final
reposit mhm and one other quick point I
think the Fear Factor here is if there
is an accident it will kill many many
more people than if there's a coal
mining accident you can
tout the deaths per terawatt hours and
nukes look very good until they don't
look good and if there's some disaster
if a terrorist takes over the plant or
it becomes the target of a weapon
and there's some kind of radioactive
leakage if it's in the fision if in the
fusion maybe as you said it's not
self-driven so maybe you'll just snuff
it out but what do you tell someone
who's concerned about how
widespread the damage would be in an
accident relative to any other sources
of death from any other source of energy
if I have time to bring that person to a
nuclear power plant I would and show
them the containment structure but if I
don't then I would show them a video of
Sandia
experimenting with the structures that
protect us from nuclear power plant
accidents and those so Sandia is it
ffrdc yeah Sandia National Laboratory in
New Mexico are they New Mexico I think
yeah that's correct in Albuquerque did
some experiments to show that you could
Ram a jet engine right into the side of
a con a containment building a sort of
standard steel and concrete structure
the Dome over the reactor
and it survives just fine who thought of
that as an actual experiment to conduct
that was that was from Mission
Impossible we're filming they should
throw it in there Tom wanted a new
challenge if if we're talking about not
in my neighborhood right M you want how
you get people to come on board which is
great education give people knowledge
about safety if you want to get people
on board and to have a nuclear
PowerPlant small or large in their
neighborhood just put a Chick-fil-A in
it if you got a Chick-fil-A attached to
nuclear power plant people are on board
you do a little drive-thru you enjoy the
uh that's how that works I never knew
this is a new PR campaign the department
of nclear exactly nuclear waste and
Chick-fil-A bring you power plants like
that do produce a lot of jobs and tax
revenues the communities love maybe they
use them to build the
Chick-fil-A okay so data centers are
connected surprisingly enough to the
people behind AI which are the tech Bros
and as such it's important for their
model going forward that they have clean
reliable energy so surely the tech Bros
are going to be driving this whole thing
along so as nuclear energy does become
the go-to source of energy for this in
the future we're seeing it already we've
seen requests for proposals and power
purchase agreements signed to ensure
that new reactors are coming online
Amazon has invested in X energy
Microsoft has invested in restarting the
Three Mile Island unit uh we have very
clear demonstration that the money is
already going towards those new
deployments and restarts and I think
it's it's helpful to have those Deep
Pockets working towards reducing the
risk for and theind builds but yeah it's
hopefully going to result in more power
even than those tech companies are going
to need because that's what we need for
our country do we see in our EverQuest
for capitalism and to Market anything
that we can that this these smrs become
so small that literally they'll be
marketed as you could have your own
nuclear reactor in your house right like
I could see a day power generator that's
a whole Fusion but that's like gives a
whole new meaning to nuking leftover is
Li literally n leftovers and here's and
here's an example in 1968 the movie 2001
came out Imagining the world in 2001
which is 33 years after that
and what they could not
figure was that the future of computing
would be distributed rather than
centralized so to them the modern
computer was this one giant computer how
controlling the whole ship the Super
Brain the Super One brain and they
weren't thinking that it could be
miniaturized you don't need a whole room
it can fit on your hip and I can watch
movies we can all watch different movies
and this is exactly and Gary referenced
it comparison to smartphone development
it could get these reactors could get so
small so that's my that's a question
back to our expert here is that a future
possibility and let me add that I'm
impressed at the level that private
enterpris is participating in trying to
solve our Energy Future because I don't
think it was always like that there was
like each City had its power plant or
each County and that was it and it was a
utility and it did the thing and the
government and that was it but in an
entrepreneurial atmosphere it seems to
me yeah I want to invent that so you buy
the product for me I want to go to a
picnic and show off and go anybody want
a smoothie here we go I'm going to power
it with my Nuclear Min miniaturized that
seems like Overkill
but yeah but you just shake no it's a
damn good smoothie not the way I make it
with energy powder strawberries bananas
that probably will be overkill for
especially the Regulatory and nuclear
non-proliferation community you want to
make sure that certain nuclear material
is kept extremely well controlled and
observed counted you know tracked uh
because there's a universe in which if
you could put it in a suitcase uh a
briefcase then there's a potential to
make a dirty bomb out of of some spent
fuel there's too many bad actors around
for it to be unlicensed I'm just say we
we are we are throwing that way into the
future so far in the future yeah with Mr
Fusion our little nuclear home friend Mr
Fusion I mean how far are we actually
away these things are obviously being
tested but how far are we away from
commercially being able to bring them to
a situation where they go online yeah
the first couple are in the very early
stages of construction and we're
expecting them to be completed some of
them hope for a fiveyear construction
timeline but it'll probably be more like
10 years and then if we don't have
orders on the books for more and more of
them in the next year or two then you
have to wait another 10 years for the
next one and so what we're seeing from
data centers and other kinds of
companies utilities like Dominion
thinking about small modular reactors
then you you see those orders that's an
opportunity to have those first
deployments five 10 years from now that
are you know connected to the grid
followed by the next many I just want
one in my basement I want to be able to
go to party and say just got a nuclear
reactor my basement you just you think
anyone's going to stay at this party
exactly you just want to be the first
one on the block with a nuclear power
reactor just looking at you like what
and then walks out all right so we got
to land This Plane so so Katherine uh
what are you working on right now so I
wrun a research group that writes
software for modeling and simulating
advanced reactors and their fuel Cycles
a lot of what we've been talking about
today I write multiphysics software with
my graduate students but what does
multiphysics mean what does that mean
yeah it's when you combine different
physics especially when you're combining
physics at different scales in my case
it's neutronics on the very small sort
of angstroms and 10 to the4 seconds kind
of time scales with thermal Hydraulics
which is more like seconds and meters if
those two things affect each other which
they do when you're talking about
reactor feedbacks and reactor accidents
the actual reaction is this tiny little
nuclear thing that has to plug into this
macroscopic facility out of which you
draw energy so I hadn't thought about it
that way multiphysics is that the word
that's right multiscale multiphysics if
you want to sound high futin and that's
in not only in size but in time scale as
well for phenomena that's right that's
right so I study Advanced reactors like
mol and salt reactors and high
temperature gas reactors sodium cool
fast reactors and recycling strategies
uh this is something really important
okay but do you earn your keep at the
University do you also teach I do I
absolutely do uh it's my favorite thing
to do in the whole wide world I'm sure
you understand how about the very cool
just make sure she she's an honest
broker here just sounds a lot like she
is you seem like you'd be great at it
you're very relatable you make it
understandable for somebody that uh
doesn't know the world I could borrow a
few jokes though I don't think they're
laugh enough uh 50 bucks a joke you're
in and I want to go in your bunker when
the whole place melts down from nuclear
I know you got the best bunker I know
you do only if I get to go to the party
with the reactor in the
basement there you go it all comes full
well let me offer a cosmic perspective
here all right if I may you may yeah
those of us old enough remember back in
the 50s and 60s where people were
imagining
Futures and you didn't have to wait
longer than a a month maybe not even a
week before one of the major magazines
Life Magazine look magazine had a cover
story that the city of tomorrow the home
of Tomorrow transportation of Tomorrow
food of tomorrow and you'd see these
artists illustrations of what tomorrow
would look like and that tomorrow was
not infinitely far away it was like in
your
lifetime what every single one of those
projections got wrong was the assumption
that we'd have unlimited access to
energy because every one of those
illustrations they had flying cars
motorized sidewalks everything was in
motion from a power source an energy
source and what it got wrong was no we
didn't walk into a future of unlimited
energy we walked into a future of cheap
Computing so we became an information
technology future not an energy
technology future and what I wonder now
hearing these developments on the
horizon and our needs that will require
it
perhaps though it's long overdue we're
on the doorstep of a future where we
derive our energy from any one of a
dozen ways and we have as much of it as
we need to do anything we want and that
is a cosmic perspective join me in
thanking Katherine Huff for your
brilliant expositions on the state of
the industry and dude always fun good
good to have you man absolutely and tell
Frank O I said hi because we we became
good friends when he was on the show
yeah he's not a fan
uh
okay why you laughing cuz it's
funny all right Gary we'll catch up with
you next time for Star Talk special
edition Neil degrass Tyson as always
bidding you to keep looking up
[Music]